Summary
If you’re planning an outdoor event—like a vacation, a hike on a trail, or fishing on a lake—it would be good to know the chances of adverse weather for the time and location you are considering. There are many types of Earth observation data that can provide information on weather conditions for a particular location and day of the year. Your challenge is to construct an app with a personalized interface that enables users to conduct a customized query to tell them the likelihood of “very hot,” “very cold,” “very windy,” “very wet,” or “very uncomfortable” conditions for the location and time they specify.

Background

Even though just about everyone would like perfect weather for a day at the beach, a holiday parade, a hike in the woods, or lunch in a city park, that doesn’t always happen. To be prepared for what the weather might bring, it would be desirable to have accurate knowledge of how likely good or poor weather conditions are for a particular place and time. Knowing the odds of what the weather could be like isn’t a weather forecast, because such odds are based on historical weather data rather than a predictive model. However, knowledge of historical conditions provides information that could enable users to be better prepared, and perhaps decide to avoid places and times where bad weather is likely. (Of course, one person’s “bad weather” might be desirable weather for someone else! For example, while some people would dread a heavy snow, skiers and snowboarders might welcome it).

NASA has collected a wealth of global weather data over multiple decades. Examples of the types of data (variables) collected include: rainfall, windspeed, dust concentration, temperature including extreme indices, snowfall and snow depth, and cloud cover. In addition, NASA has developed models that can use these data variables to establish weather conditions that are typical for a particular location and time (season/month/day of the year), as well as the probabilities of the occurrence of extreme weather conditions. 

Many apps can provide weather forecasts 1-2 weeks in advance, including average “normal” values for many locations. However, it would be useful to have an app that could determine what the weather conditions are likely to be for a specific place and time several months in advance. NASA Earth observation data can be used to create a compendium of data for a selected location at any time of the year to determine this information. Furthermore, given that conditions are changing in many places, NASA data can also be used to estimate if the likelihood of heavy rain, dangerously high temperatures, high humidity, or heat waves have been increasing for a location at a particular time of the year.

Objectives
Your challenge is to develop an application that uses NASA Earth observation data and enables users to create a personalized dashboard to obtain information about the likelihood of specified weather conditions (e.g., temperature, precipitation, air quality, windspeed, etc.) at a location and time (day of the year) they select.

Think about how users will provide information (e.g., the desired location) on the dashboard. Will they type in the name of a place, draw a boundary on a map, or drop a “pin” on an existing map? What kind of information would be most helpful to your intended users? Perhaps they may wish to see a mean over time for the specified variables, and understand the probability of exceeding certain thresholds (for example, a 60% chance or higher of extreme heat conditions above 90 degrees Fahrenheit). How will your app provide the desired information? Will users see graphs or maps that illustrate the probability of these weather events accompanied by a simple text explanation, or something else? Don’t forget that some users will desire the capability to download an output file containing the subset of data that pertains to the query (i.e., the relevant data variables for the specified location and time of interest).

Potential Considerations
You may (but are not required to) consider the following:

Output data containing metadata with units and input source links could be accessible outside of the app and be downloadable in Comma Separated Values (CSV) or JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format.
Users of this app will likely have a sufficient understanding of the variables that are available in the interface (rainfall, windspeed, dust concentration, temperature, etc.); therefore, your app will not necessarily need to define them.
Don’t forget to make sure that the list of potential variables users can choose covers the primary weather conditions that participants in outdoor activities would be expected to be interested in. Too many variables could be confusing, so be careful not to use too many different variables for the same quantity (e.g., there are several different types of rainfall data, so selection of the most useful/accurate data variable is important).
Think about how your tool could provide a visual representation of results and perhaps provide an option to download that output. Would it be best to display a bell curve showing the range of probabilities, a time series over a point, or an average over a specified area? Existing services (see Resources tab) can be used to access and subset the data, facilitating the computation of statistics.